.TH MIDI-BLE-RTCTL 1 "July 2026" "midi-ble-rt" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
midi-ble-rtctl \- control and diagnostics CLI for midi-ble-rt
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B midi-ble-rtctl
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS... ]
.br
.B midi-ble-rtctl
.BR \-v | \-\-version
.br
.B midi-ble-rtctl
.BR \-vv | \-\-version-verbose
.br
.B midi-ble-rtctl
.B help
.RI [ COMMAND ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B midi-ble-rtctl
is the command-line control and diagnostics tool for midi-ble-rt.  It can inspect
BlueZ devices, prepare BLE-MIDI devices, write local configuration, talk to a
running
.BR midi-ble-rtd (1)
instance through its local control socket, and print runtime diagnostics.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h , " " \-\-help
Print global help.
.TP
.BR \-v , " " \-\-version
Print CLI version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-vv , " " \-\-version-verbose
Print version plus compiled feature summary and exit.
.SH BLUEZ AND DEVICE COMMANDS
.TP
.B list
List known BlueZ devices.
.TP
.B scan
Run BlueZ discovery, then list devices.
.TP
.B info
Show one device's BlueZ properties.
.TP
.B probe
Connect if needed and inspect BLE-MIDI GATT objects.
.TP
.B pair
Pair a device through BlueZ
.IR Device1.Pair .
.TP
.B trust
Set BlueZ
.IR Device1.Trusted=true .
.TP
.B untrust
Set BlueZ
.IR Device1.Trusted=false .
.TP
.B connect
Prepare a BLE-MIDI device using BlueZ.  This may pair, trust, connect, probe,
and optionally write local configuration depending on command options.
.TP
.B configure
Write a local
.BR midi-ble-rtd (1)
configuration file.
.TP
.B disconnect
Disconnect a BlueZ device.
.TP
.B forget
Remove a device from the BlueZ cache or pairing records.
.SH DAEMON CONTROL COMMANDS
These commands require a running
.BR midi-ble-rtd (1)
instance.  They use the daemon control socket below
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/midi-ble-rt/control.sock .
.TP
.B daemon-ping
Ping the running daemon.  Expected reply:
.IR "OK PONG" .
.TP
.B daemon-status
Print one daemon runtime status line.
.TP
.B daemon-list
List configured daemon sessions.
.TP
.BI daemon-connect " DEVICE"
Ask the daemon to connect a configured device.  DEVICE must match a configured
id or Bluetooth address.
.TP
.BI daemon-disconnect " DEVICE"
Ask the daemon to disconnect a configured device.
.TP
.BI daemon-recheck " DEVICE"
Ask the daemon to recheck a configured device.
.SH DAEMON STATUS FIELDS
.B daemon-status
prints an
.I OK STATUS
line with key-value fields.
.TP
.B devices
Number of configured device sessions known to the daemon.
.TP
.B streaming
Number of configured device sessions currently in STREAMING state.
.TP
.B alsa_tx_thread
Shared ALSA Sequencer TX thread state:
.I running
or
.IR stopped .
.TP
.B rx_workers, tx_workers
Number of per-device runtime worker threads currently allocated.
.TP
.B rtkit
Whether RTKit scheduling was requested by daemon configuration:
.I on
or
.IR off .
.TP
.B rtkit_priority
Configured RTKit realtime priority after daemon-side clamping.
.TP
.B rtkit_rx, rtkit_tx
Whether RTKit is enabled for RX and TX runtime worker classes:
.I on
or
.IR off .
.TP
.B lifecycle_busy
Whether the daemon lifecycle/control-plane queue is currently executing a
command:
.I yes
or
.IR no .
.TP
.B lifecycle_queue
Number of pending lifecycle/control-plane commands.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.nf
OK STATUS devices=1 streaming=1 alsa_tx_thread=running rx_workers=1 tx_workers=1 rtkit=on rtkit_priority=1 rtkit_rx=on rtkit_tx=off lifecycle_busy=no lifecycle_queue=0
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS COMMANDS
.TP
.BR stats " [--path PATH]"
Print one formatted stats snapshot.  The default path is
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/midi-ble-rt/stats.tsv .
.TP
.BR top " [--path PATH] [--interval MS]"
Repeatedly print stats snapshots.
.TP
.BR latency " [--path PATH]"
Print one latency diagnostics snapshot.  The default path is
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/midi-ble-rt/latency.tsv .
.TP
.BR latency-top " [--path PATH] [--interval MS]"
Repeatedly print latency diagnostics snapshots.
.SH EXAMPLES
Scan for BLE-MIDI devices:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtctl scan --timeout 10 --midi-only
.fi
.PP
Prepare a Roland GO:KEYS profile and write configuration:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtctl connect CB:81:F4:62:FF:07 --profile roland_gokeys --write-config
.fi
.PP
Check daemon state:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtctl daemon-status
.fi
.PP
Show detailed help for daemon status fields:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtctl help daemon-status
midi-ble-rtctl daemon-status --help
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR midi-ble-rtd (1),
.BR aconnect (1),
.BR aplaymidi (1),
.BR aseqdump (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at the project repository:
.IR https://github.com/mwprado/midi-ble-rt .
