.TH MIDI-BLE-RTD 1 "July 2026" "midi-ble-rt" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
midi-ble-rtd \- ALSA Sequencer to BLE-MIDI daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B midi-ble-rtd
.BR \-\-config " " DIR
.br
.B midi-ble-rtd
.BR \-\-config-dir " " DIR
.br
.B midi-ble-rtd
.BR \-v | \-\-version
.br
.B midi-ble-rtd
.BR \-vv | \-\-version-verbose
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B midi-ble-rtd
runs the midi-ble-rt daemon.  It bridges ALSA Sequencer MIDI ports to
configured BLE-MIDI devices through BlueZ GATT.
.PP
The daemon uses configuration-directory mode only.  One daemon process owns one
BlueZ system-bus connection, one ALSA Sequencer client, and one runtime session
per configured BLE-MIDI device.  Each configured device gets a stable ALSA port
inside the daemon's ALSA client.  Normal BLE disconnect/reconnect cycles change
session state but do not recreate the local ALSA port.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " DIR"
Load daemon configuration from
.IR DIR .
The directory must contain
.I daemon.ini
and a
.I devices.d
subdirectory with one or more
.I *.ini
device files.
.TP
.BI \-\-config-dir " DIR"
Alias for
.BR \-\-config .
.TP
.BR \-v , " " \-\-version
Print daemon version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-vv , " " \-\-version-verbose
Print version plus compiled feature summary and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The daemon expects a directory layout similar to:
.PP
.nf
~/.config/midi-ble-rt/
  daemon.ini
  devices.d/
    controller.ini
.fi
.PP
Common
.I daemon.ini
keys:
.TP
.BR [defaults].pair
Pair configured devices by default.
.TP
.BR [defaults].trust
Set BlueZ
.I Trusted=true
by default.
.TP
.BR [defaults].reconnect_on_link_loss
Reconnect sessions after BLE link loss.
.TP
.BR [defaults].enable_tx
Enable ALSA-to-BLE MIDI transmit path by default.
.TP
.BR [gatt].service_uuid
BLE-MIDI service UUID.  The default is the standard BLE-MIDI service UUID.
.TP
.BR [gatt].io_uuid
BLE-MIDI I/O characteristic UUID.  The default is the standard BLE-MIDI I/O UUID.
.TP
.BR [gatt].io_uuid_alias
Optional alternate characteristic UUID, used for device-specific aliases.
.TP
.BR [gatt].require_notify
Require notification support on the selected BLE-MIDI characteristic.
.TP
.BR [gatt].require_write_without_response
Require Write Without Response support for TX.
.TP
.BR [daemon].client_name
ALSA Sequencer client name.  Default:
.IR midi-ble-rt .
.TP
.BR [alsa].port_name
Default ALSA port name for configured devices.
.TP
.BR [stats].enabled
Enable runtime
.I stats.tsv
export.
.TP
.BR [stats].interval_ms
Stats export interval in milliseconds.
.TP
.BR [stats].latency_diagnostics
Enable runtime
.I latency.tsv
diagnostics export.
.TP
.BR [realtime].rtkit
Request RTKit realtime scheduling.
.TP
.BR [realtime].realtime_rx
Apply RTKit to RX worker threads when RTKit is enabled.  Default: yes.
.TP
.BR [realtime].realtime_tx
Apply RTKit to TX worker threads when RTKit is enabled.  Default: no.
.TP
.BR [realtime].rt_priority
RTKit realtime priority.  The daemon clamps the value to its supported range.
.PP
Common
.I devices.d/*.ini
keys:
.TP
.BR [device].id
Stable local device identifier used by
.B midi-ble-rtctl daemon-connect
and related commands.
.TP
.BR [device].address
Bluetooth device address.
.TP
.BR [device].name
Human-readable device name.
.TP
.BR [device].profile
Device profile name.  Use
.I standard_ble_midi
for generic BLE-MIDI devices or a specific profile such as
.I roland_gokeys
when a quirk is required.
.TP
.BR [device].alsa_port_name
ALSA port name for this configured device.
.TP
.BR [device].enabled
Whether this device config is active.
.TP
.BR [device].connect_on_start
Connect this configured device during daemon startup.
.TP
.BR [policy].pair
Override default pairing policy for this device.
.TP
.BR [policy].trust
Override default BlueZ trust policy for this device.
.TP
.BR [policy].reconnect_on_link_loss
Override default reconnect policy for this device.
.TP
.BR [midi].enable_tx
Override default ALSA-to-BLE transmit policy for this device.
.SH RUNTIME FILES
By default the daemon writes runtime files below
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/midi-ble-rt ,
or below the system temporary directory if
.I XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
is not set.
.TP
.I control.sock
Local control socket used by
.BR midi-ble-rtctl .
.TP
.I stats.tsv
Runtime packet, byte, drop, queue, and session statistics.
.TP
.I latency.tsv
Optional latency diagnostics file when enabled in configuration.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the daemon with the user's configuration directory:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtd --config ~/.config/midi-ble-rt
.fi
.PP
Show verbose daemon version and feature defaults:
.PP
.nf
midi-ble-rtd -vv
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR midi-ble-rtctl (1),
.BR aconnect (1),
.BR aplaymidi (1),
.BR aseqdump (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at the project repository:
.IR https://github.com/mwprado/midi-ble-rt .
